To Reviewers:
Thank you so much for the review! Here I list the reviewers comments and how I
addressed the comments:

Meta Review:
1.

Expanding the Background and Related Work sections.
Done

2.

Resolving issues with the gures and writing.
Done

3.

Clearly describe the implications of the proposed weaker isolation model on
broader adoption and security threat model
Done, added threat model section.

4.

Expansion of evaluation benchmarks as well as better justi cations for the
choice of benchmarks
I’ve provided justi cation for choice of benchmarks in added discussion section.

5.

Clari cation on how the system would scale (multi-node results needed)
I’ve added explanation of lack of multi-node results in added discussion section.

6.

Clearly listing the shortcomings of the proposed design compared to existing
solutions
Done in the added discussion section

7.

Comparison to a serverless platform (the current evaluation is centered around
microservices)
I’ve revised the paper to focus on microservices and removed serverless related

parts.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Rebuttal to unaddressed comments:

from reviewer 3 :

comment: Is the expected execution time practically predictable? It could be better if
the authors can show the predictability using production data from Azure function
traces. And also, how is the threshold for short/long-running processes are
determined? Maybe a sensitivity study can be added to see if the threshold is a ecting
the performance a lot.
answer: Although we haven’t used production data, but we think it’s reasonable to
assume that in many cases that the execution times of di erent services will di er, and
at least they can fall into di erent ranges.
comment: One reason that containers/VMs are widely used is its integration with
cluster management platforms that supports important functionalities like orchestration
and autoscaling. The paper could include a discussion on how Pyrosome sandboxs are
orchestrated and resource sized and how to integrate with cluster management.
answer: This is not the focus of our paper as our goal is to evaluate what bene ts
microservices applications can get from light-weight language-based isolation, and we
are not trying to build a production ready product.
comment: Handling libraries, dependencies and packages would likely be more
challenging compared to container images.
answer: Same answer as above.
comment: How does monitoring supported? Containers on Kubernetes have rich realtime monitoring support by a lot of tools in the ecosystem.
answer: Same answer as above.
comment: What is the implementation cost of DeathStarBench on Pyrosome? This is
crucial for practical adoption. “…user posts and timelines are stored in the underlying
datastore on Pyrosome” how is this realistic compared to storing in backend
MongoDB?
answer: Same answer above. Plus it’s quite common for social network systems to
store popular data in caches.
comment: The paper does not discuss fault tolerance, reliability, and consistency
guarantees provided by Pyrosome, which are critical for production-grade
microservices.

ff

ff

fi

ff

ff

answer: Same answer as above.

P YROSOME : A RUNTIME FOR E FFICIENT AND F INE - GRAINED M ICROSERVICES
AND S ERVERLESS

Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review

Abstract
Developers have shifted from deploying applications on
physical machines, to virtual machines, and to containers
, and now to serverless functions. Such shift of abstractions
have also changed the way applications are structured. Today’s cloud-native applications are naturally structured in a
higher-level and more decomposed way. However, today’s
cloud and serverless platforms are still layered on top of
the same inefficient legacy software infrastructure and abstractions as in the past. We argue that these legacy layers
are now redundant, and we explore a clean-slate cloud services runtime targeted toward microservice- and serverlessera JavaScript applications we call Pyrosome.
Pyrosome provides simple programming interfaces for executing JavaScript code, storing and sharing data, and lowoverhead communication without worrying about resource
allocation and scheduling. It leverages the V8 JavaScript runtime’s low-overhead language-based sandboxing that avoids
the full state and scheduling costs of operating system processes or containers. This allows implementation of a holistic
scheduler that quickly redistributes load among cores, exploits parallelism in applications, and avoids tail latency with
execution-time-aware shardingpartitioning. The DeathStarBench microservices benchmarks show that Pyrosome speeds
up microservice applications by as much as 4× and improves
throughput by 10×. Additionally, we show Pyrosome balances load nearly instantly compared to standard microservice
platforms.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, cloud computing platforms
have
evolved from
lower-level toward higherlevel abstractions, from machine-level (virtual machines),
to
operating
system-level (containers)
and even higher-level programming abstractions like
serverless [20, 28]. The evolution of cloud computing technologies and the need for efficient software development and
maintenance has also led to fundamental changes in designing
and deploying cloud applications, resulting in new cloud
application paradigms such as microservices and serverless.
There are two dimensions of paradigm shift for cloud
applications. First, applications are leveraging high-level
cloud-native abstractions, which frees developers from

system-level resource management, scheduling and orchestration. Second, applications are being decomposed into
finer granularity components. Decomposing applications
into small services with well-defined interfaces, as with
the microservies architecure, allows each service to be
developed, maintained and scaled independently while matching organizational structures, which improves developer
productivity especially for large-scale applications [15].
Some organizations have gone further to make services even
smaller (e.g. the BBC’s nanoservices platform [14]), with the
expectation that smaller services limit the impact of failures,
allow for more rapid iteration, and support flexible resource
sharing.
However, today’s cloud platforms, as the legacy from
a decade of evolution of cloud technologies, is comprised
of layers of software infrastructure and abstractions that
are redundant and inefficient for fine-grained microservies
and serverless applications. For example, the containerization layer, on top of which most of today’s microservices
and serverless platforms are built, adds additional isolation and communication costs. Microservices isolated in
containers communicate with each other over the network,
which can cost as much as one third of the total execution
time [22]. The added overheads offset some of the benefits of microservices architecture, which means the benefits of microservices only outweigh the additional overheads
for large complex applications. Smaller applications (especially ones composed of smaller microservices) are still
better off implemented as monoliths to avoid these overheads. The high cost of cold starts (the process of creating and setting up new containers when capacity is underprovisioned) slows down resource reprovisioning and can impact the availability of serverless applications during scaling
up. As a result, the instant scalability promise of serverless
computing cannot be fully fulfilled either.
It’s becoming a very compelling and real problem of
microservices and serverless application deployment in the
industry. For example, the Prime Video application was
previously implemented as a distributed microservices
architecture, but was forced to abandon the microservices
architecture due to high costs and scaling bottlenecks.
They moved back to the monolith architecture and as a result
reduced costs by 90%.
A deep-rooted mismatch is that virtual machines and containers implement strong isolation to mitigate risks between

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

untrusted users; however, this security is unnecessary for
services from a single large application where only basic
inter-service fault-isolation is required. In addition, many
microservices and serverless applications are taking a cloudnative approach that relies on high-level abstractions and
interfaces provided by cloud platforms, and expect cloud platforms to hide the complexities of underlying hardware and
software infrastructure. Thus the virtualized operating system
abstraction provided by containerization is no longer needed.
In light of this, we propose a clean-slate design for a microservices deployment system that we call Pyrosome. We
leverage the fact that in the following common use cases
strong security isolation is not needed, to design Pyrosome
as a PoC of a runtime with minimal isolation costs between
mutually trusted microservices /functions and applications:

services like key-value stores [8, 16, 30, 42, 45]. Specifically,
first, we propose a new execution-time-aware scheduling policy that exploits parallelism across and within services and
avoiding inter-service interference while keeping CPU utilization high and balanced. Second, we propose execution-timeaware shardingpartitioning that partitions latency-sensitive,
short-running services from longer-running services and show
its benefits in avoiding latency due to head-of-line blocking
between services.
In the following sections we describe the design and implementation of Pyrosome, and we evaluate Pyrosome against existing container systems. Our evaluation shows that Pyrosome
scales linearly and improves throughput by 10×, reduces median latency of a social media microservices application by
4×, and it can support services more than an order of magnitude more granular than today’s services. Pyrosome can also
handle substantial and sudden load increases with no impact
on client-perceived latency.

• Microservices and serverless functions of the same application should be mutually trusted, so there’s no need
for strong security isolation between them.
• Many microservices and serverless applications are actually deployed in trusted environment, on private infrastructure and private cloud computing platform, within
which security is less of a concern.

2

Background

Microservices. Microservices is an application architecture that decomposes an application into small services with
each running in a set of independent processes. This benefits
software development and maintenance because each service
can be developed and maintained independently reducing human communication costs. Because of the many benefits of
microservices architecture, nowadays many large web applications are implemented as microservies. For example, the
popular Netflix video streaming platform is implemented as a
cluster of more than 700 microservices [41]. Microservices
applications are usually deployed as a cluster of OS-level
containers, and services are packaged using easily-deployable
container images [54], which can contain a service and its
software dependencies.

• On public cloud, mutually trusted applications (e.g. applications from the same client) can share the same security sandbox (e.g. a VM) within which they don’t
need strong security isolation between each other. So
Pyrosome runtime can be deployed inside such a security sandbox to support a group of mutually trusted
applications.
Two key aspects of Pyrosome’s design lead to these benefits. The first is that Pyrosome leverages lightweight languagelevel code isolation using software (V8) sandboxes and an inprocess data cache. This lowers cross-sandbox/cross-service
communication and data access costs. Additionally, since isolation and communication is low overhead, Pyrosome is able
to support microservices of much finer granularity than today’s standard container-based approach. It also ensures that
Pyrosome can keep enough inexpensive sandboxes ready to
eliminate the need for costly cold starts for container creation,
so Pyrosome can instantly reprovision resources to handle
sudden load changes. The second key aspect of Pyrosome’s
design demonstrates that in radically redesigning the cloud
software infrastructure, cloud platforms can find opportunities
for advanced optimizations for today’s cloud-native applications. With low-overhead isolation, each service operation
on Pyrosome can complete in microseconds or less. Thus, its
scheduler works on a much finer timescale than conventional
microservice resource schedulers (e.g. Kubernetes). With this
in mind, Pyrosome’s scheduler is designed to support several
new optimizations that are largely inspired by recently finegrained dispatch policies minimizing tail latency in simpler

VM and Container-based Isolation Virtual machines rely
on hypervisor [7, 32] based isolation. With much smaller attack surface than the OS kernel and the strong isolation provided by the hardware virtualization features, VM-based isolation is preferrable in scenarios where strong security isolation is needed. But in VM-based isolation each sandbox
must have its own OS kernel and libraries, resulting in heavy
performance costs. Container-based virtualization emerged
to address this problem. In container based virtualization
sandboxes share the same OS kernel, and relies on OS-level
virtualization mechanisms, such as namespace and cgroups in
Linux kernel, for security and resource isolation. Docker [38]
is a popular container platform used by many of today’s applications. Kubernetes [6] is a popular container-orchestration
system used to deploy, maintain and scale container clusters.
The security isolation of containers is weaker than VMs, as
the attack surface is much larger with the shared OS kernel.

2

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

As a result, containers are also often deployed on top of virtual machines for stronger security isolation between groups
of containers.
Serverless Computing. Serverless computing [1, 4, 39] is
similar to microservices, and platforms for them should help
by offering granular, pay-as-you-go billing where the cloud
provider manages scaling, and serverless has helped in some
domains [5, 12, 13, 18, 43, 46, 48, 52].
However, developers are not completely freed from
provisioning and scaling concerns with serverless computing.
Serverless functions are typically implemented in containers
and the high cost of cold starts can impact the availability
of serverless applications during scaling up. AWS provides
Provisioned Concurrency [44] for developers to specify the
expected peak load and reserve resources for it, pushing the
burden of operations back to developers.

Figure 1: Pyrosome Overall Design

sandboxing. Each service is isolated in a very light-weight
V8 context. Note that Pyrosome’s design is not limited to
the V8 runtime, and can be implemented using any language
runtime that provides light-weight isolation [26, 60].

Lightweight Language-based Isolation Safe hight-level
programming languange and runtime mechanisms can be
leveraged as a lightweight alternative to heavy-weight VMbased and OS-level isolation. The V8 JavaScript runtime [57]
is widely used to run JavaScript code in isolations within the
same browser or server process. Cloudflare [58] has built a
serverless edge compute platform with the V8 JavaScritp runtime that is able to support massive multi-tenancy with low
overhead. Rust [56] is a safe systems programming language
that allows lightweight isolation, and is used to build esxtensible multi-tenant low-latency storage systems [10, 34, 61].
A disadvantage of language-based isolation is that usually
it only supports a single language. A solution to this problem is offered by WebAssembly (Wasm) [23, 24], which is
a compilation target for programming languages. Untrusted
code of various languages can be compiled to Wasm and
run in Wasm’s default light-weight sandboxed environment.
Wasm is not only used in the web environment, but also
used to build cloud systems [17, 53, 59] and edge computing systems [21, 29] that achieve significant performance improvement over container-based systems.

3

3.1

Design Goals

Here, we elaborate on the core aspects of its design before
describing the details of its implementation.
Simple high-level abstractions. Pyrosome should provide
simple high-level programming abstractions for cloud application developers and hide the complexities of the underlying
software infrastructure. Developers can then focused on application level logics.
Low-overhead Deployment and Flexible Modularization.
Services should be logically isolated but not necessarily
strongly physically isolated. High communication costs impede developers, forcing them to develop and scale their application in coarser units to amortize costs. Smaller services
limit the impact of failures, allow for more rapid iteration,
and support flexible resource sharing.
Instant and Transparent Resource Reprovisioning.
Containers’ high cold start times results in wasteful overprovisioning and resource fragmentation; since containers
are slow to create, operators must provision extra containers
for each service to accommodate load changes [44]. In
comparison, Pyrosome’s isolated sandboxes can be created
nearly instantaneously, and idle sandboxes (V8 Isolates)
only occupy 3 MB of memory (compared to 35 MB for
a container [11]). Furthermore, Pyrosome’s design only
requires one V8 Isolate per core, and each service on the
same core has its own V8 Context, which is lighter-weight.
Hence, Pyrosome can keep a Context per-service per-core,
which avoids sandbox creation overheads altogether, letting it
instantly shift any service’s load to any core.

Pyrosome Design

Figure 1 shows the basic design of Pyrosome. Pyrosome
works as a collective compute container for deployed services.
Applications deploy a set of logical services to a machine
running Pyrosome. Pyrosome as the software layer between
hardware resources and applications, provides simple interfaces for applications that hides the complexities of managing
hardware resources. It can fluidly reprovision hardware resources on-demand, providing an automated resource pool for
applications. It also provides shared access to local cached
state for instances of stateful services. Pyrosome achieves
efficiency and low-overhead by leveraging language-level

3

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Low-overhead Runtime Level Scheduling and Optimization Containers and virtual machines depend on operatingsystem-level scheduling, which is problematic for interdependent fine-grained computations due to costly thread
context switches and the kernel’s lack of request-level visibility. Pyrosome efficiently schedules thousands of functions
with better visibility because its runtime-level scheduler runs
in the same process as services, letting it observe and schedule requests with low overhead. Pyrosome’s low scheduling
overhead lets services use CPU cores efficiently at much finer
timescales.
Moreover, Pyrosome’s runtime-level scheduler is able to
implement advanced optimizations exploiting information collected at runtime for microservices and serverless workloads,
which is beyond the capabilites of OS-level scheduling. We
demonstrate this with a scheduling policy called executiontime-aware shardingpartitioning that optimizes application
tail latencies. Microservices and serverless applications vary
in structure and per-invocation execution times [51]. Some
applications are composed mostly of short-running functions [22, 27], but some services (e.g. machine learning) rely
on long-running, compute-intensive services [31]. By observing these differences, Pyrosome can avoid problems like tail
latency due to head-of-line blocking caused by long-running
functions. Inspired by the Minos key-value store’s size-aware
sharding [16], execution-time-aware shardingpartitioning,
extends Minos’ approach to generalized, opaque functions
whose runtime varies rather than just basic get/put operations.

Figure 2: Pyrosome Basic Architecture

WebAssembly [36, 49].
As a result, Pyrosome is designed as a runtime for running mutually trusted services and is not secure for running
untrusted code. All services running in the same Pyrosome
runtime instance are effectively running in the same process
and address space, so they must be mutually trusted. The
light-weight isolation provided by Pyrosome is mainly for
fault isolation, so that software bugs in one service will not
affect other services.

4

Pyrosome is built on the Seastar framework [50]. Seastar’s
shared-nothing execution model enables Pyrosome to scale
nearly-linearly across cores. Pyrosome leverages the V8
JavaScript engine as lightweight language level isolation for
services. Other runtimes like Lucet and Wasmer could be
used instead to support WebAssembly to give developers
more flexibility [26, 60].
In Pyrosome, each core processes incoming requests in a
single-threaded event loop. Each core also hosts a V8 isolate,
which is an instance of the V8 engine (Figure 2). Services
on the same core are isolated in different V8 Contexts, which
fault isolation so errors in one service don’tdo not cause other
services to malfunction. They also provide an isolated execution environment with its own set of global variables, built-in
objects and functions, so that services can be developed and
maintained independently. There is also a scheduler on each
core to schedule the execution of services. Each service has a
key-value store that can be used to store state that must persist
between invocations; and it also acts as a cache for external
database accesses. Instances of the same service running on
different cores share the same key-value store.

In Process Data CacheLow-overhead Access To States
Microservices are usually stateful. To achieve high performance, not only should services communicate between each
other with low overhead, services should also access data with
low overhead. In current microservices approach, the state of
services are usually stored in external databases or separate
database services. That entails cross boundary overheads for
data accesses. Our design provides data stores that resides
in the same process with the services. Each service has its
own datastore that is shared by all the instances of the service.
Services can store ephemeral data in the datastore. For persistent data, the datastore can function as the cache between the
service and external databases.

3.2

Implementation

Threat Model

While language-based isolation is low-overhead, it supports
weaker security isolation compared to virtualization and
process-based isolation. Especially after the discovery of
side-channel attacks that exploits the CPU’s speculative execution such as Spectre [33]. Malicious code can leverage such attacks to evade language-based isolation and access data outside of its sandbox as long as the data resides
within the same address space. The Spectre attack has already been demostrated to be effective in JavaScript and

4.1

Programming Interfaces.

Pyrosome provides a list of very simple programming interfaces. async_call() and reply() allows a service to invoke
and communicate with another service. The .then() call-

4

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Figure 3: Programming Interfaces.
Figure 4: Pyrosome Networking Architecture
back of the caller service will be invoked to receive the replied
result. db_get() and db_set() are provided for stateful services to read and write their key value stores.

4.2

Networking

In Seastar, all incoming network connections are randomly
distributed among all cores in hardware by the network card.
Pyrosome modifies Seastar so that cores are divided into dispatcher cores and worker cores (Figure 4); incoming network
connections are only distributed to and processed by the dispatcher cores. We use DPDK to bypass the kernel networking
stack; Pyrosome relies on Seastar’s user-level network stack
on dispatcher cores rather than the standard Linux TCP stack.
Dispatcher cores can also run services. The worker cores
do not receive client requests from the network; instead they
only run services scheduled to them from the dispatcher cores.
This design prevents long-running functions from blocking
network packet processing. It also enables execution-time
aware shardingpartitioning which we detail below.
There are two levels of load balancing in Pyrosome. First,
incoming HTTP requests are randomly distributed to the dispatcher cores (Figure 4). The second level of load balancing
is done by the scheduler on each core, which we describe
next.

Figure 3 shows the code structure of services on Pyrosome.
A service is a group of related functions that share the same
V8 context. Each function in a service is addressed independently. For example, if a client wants to invoke func_a2()
in Service_A, it can issue an HTTP request to address “/Service_A/func_a2” to Pyrosome. Services on Pyrosome can
also call functions of other services asynchronously, through
the async_call() interface. async_call() is implemented
as a C++ binding that calls the scheduler to schedule and run
the callee function. The caller can pass messages through
async_call() to the callee function as the argument via
shared memory. Complex objects can be serialized JSON
strings; the callee must parse the JSON to retrieve the objects.
This makes it possible to implement sophisticated APIs between services. The reply of a service call is sent through the
reply() interface to the caller service. The .then() interface is used to implement the callback to be invoked once the
replied result is received. A client-facing service also uses
reply() to return result to the requesting client in an HTTP
reply.

4.3

Stateful services can use db_get() and db_set() to read
and write their key value stores. When instances of the same
service are running on different cores, their writes could cause
consistency problems. To ensure consistency, we implement
compare and swap semantics for accesses to key value stores.
A version number is attached to each record; when an instance of a service reads and then writes to its key value store,
db_set() checks if the given version number matches the
current version number of the record in the key value store
to ensure no other instance on some other core has updated
the record between the read and write. If the version numbers
don’tdo not match, the db_set() returns an Abort status to
inform the caller that the write has failed. Services should
check the return status of db_set(), if failed they should read
the updated record and redo the operation on the record and
retry db_set().

Execution-Time-Aware Scheduling

Figure 5 shows the architecture of the Pyrosome scheduler.
Each core has its own scheduler, and they share one scheduler
table. The scheduler table tracks the task queue and states of
each core, including whether the core is busy or idle and the
expected time that the core will become idle if it is busy.
When a service function is called (whether by a client request or by another service function), the local scheduler is
invoked. The scheduler tries to find an idle core in the scheduler table; if no idle core is found, then it finds the core with
the earliest expected idle time and pushes the function into
the task queue of that target core. The scheduler updates the
status of the target core by querying a set of shared statistics
to find the expected execution time of the function and updating the expected idle time of the target core accordingly.
The task queues and core states are protected by a mutex for

5

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

in key-value stores [16]. The key idea is that by isolating the
short-running service functions (which are likely to be latency
sensitive) from longer-running functions, tail latency is improved since it reduces head-of-line blocking. The scheduler
collects function execution times at runtime and use them
for future scheduling decisions, under the assumption that
function execution times are mostly stable across invocations.
The scheduler uses a threshold to determine if a function
is a short-running function or a long-running function. Longrunning functions are scheduled on worker cores only, while
short-running functions can be scheduled on any core. Limiting long-running functions to worker cores prevents them
from blocking network packets processing on the dispatcher
cores and improves latencies of the short-running functions by
avoiding head-of-line blocking. The threshold can be adjusted
for different workloads and SLA requirements.
A problem is that concurrent requests can interfere with
each other. When a function calls another function using
async_call(), the callee function returns result to the caller
function asynchronous through a callback function. The execution of the callback function can be delayed by another
function from another concurrent request, resulting in higher
latency. The impact of this problem depends on the CPU
load and the structure of the workflow. Complex workflows
consist of large number of inter-dependent functions are more
impacted. We implemented an optimization called fusedexecution mode if the scheduler detects high latency of requests. With fused-execution mode the workflow of a request
will be executed in a run-to-completion mode to avoid such
interferences.

Figure 5: Scheduler Workflow

5

Figure 6: Execution-Time-Aware Sharding

Evaluation

We evaluate Pyrosome with a series of microbenchmarks and
a social network application ported from DeathStarBench [22]
seeking to answer five key questions, which we summarize
results for here:
Does Pyrosome improve service throughput and efficiency over conventional microservice platforms? Pyrosome scales linearly to 16 cores, and it handles 10× the
requests per second than the same service deployed as a containerized microservice.
What are the limits of service granularities that Pyrosome can support? On conventional containers decomposing a service that runs for 4 ms per invocation into 4 services
will reduce the efficiency to about 50%. Our measurements
suggest that Pyrosome can decompose a 4 ms computation
into as many as 80 services before the efficiency drops below
50%, so Pyrosome can support services more than an order
of magnitude more granular than today’s services.
Does Pyrosome help on complex microservices? Our results show, Pyrosome reduces median latency of a social
media microservices application by 4×.

safe concurrent access. The scheduler on each core constantly
pulls tasks from its own task queue and runs them.
Pyrosome’s approach is simple and avoids the cost and
complexities of preemption while working well for the workloads we measure (e.g. ZygOS must expose a virtualized
APIC interface to userspace in order to efficiently trigger
inter-processor interrupts [45] making it vulnerable to denialof-service attacks).
With both network-level and scheduler-level load balancing,
Pyrosome can balance load among all cores and avoid hot
spots and accommodate bursty workloads well. In addition,
the design exploits the internal parallelism of applications
well. When a service function issues concurrent calls to
multiple services, these functions are automatically spanned
to different cores.
Pyrosome also implements a new approach to scheduling different service functions called execution-time-aware
shardingpartitioning (Figure 5 6); the idea is similar to sizeaware sharding, which has been used to improve tail latency

6

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Does Pyrosome handle load shifts well? Pyrosome can handle substantial and sudden load increases with no impact on
client-perceived latency. Similar load increases will cause latency spikes that renders services unavailable on when using
Kubernetes’ autoscaling to handle shifts.

5.1

Hardware Setup

We run our experiments on the CloudLab testbed [47]. In all
experiments each physical node is a Dell PowerEdge R430
server with two 2.4 GHz Intel Xeon E5-2630v3 8-core CPUs
(16 hardware threads) and 64 GB RAM interconnected by
1 Gbps Ethernet.

5.2

Figure 7: Throughput Under Increasing LoadWith Increasing
Number of Cores

Comparison to Kubernetes & Containers

In this section, we compare performance of microservices
applications deployed on Pyrosome versus deployed in containers. To make a fair comparison, in this section we run
Pyrosome without DPDK or its user-level network stack so
that the Pyrosome deployment and container deployment are
both running with the same default Linux kernel network
stack.
5.2.1

and it lets us compare Pyrosome against a baseline, conventional container-based approach to microservices.
Figure 7 shows the results as we run the service on an increasing number of CPU cores. If user credentials are cached
in Pyrosome’s local KVStore (“pyrosome w/o db”) throughput is improved by 10× over a container-based deployment
of the same service (“container w/ db”). When user credentials are not cached in Pyrosome (“pyrosome w/ db”), its
throughput immediately collapses to match the performance
of the container-based approach. So, eliminating costly, synchronous remote accesses for data is crucial to Pyrosome’s
performance. When running Pyrosome, these remote accesses
to MongoDB cause CPU utilization to drop to 50% as threads
block waiting on the database and experience costly context
switches. Of course, a container-based solution can perform
local caching as well, but even when we eliminated the remote
database access from the container-based service (“container
w/o db”) its performance only improved by 2×.
Together these results show that improving runtime overheads only helps if other bottlenecks in remote communication are also eliminated, demonstrating the importance of
Pyrosome’s holistic approach. It not only eliminates costly
inter-service communications, but it also eliminates data access costs via in-process caching. Containers could have a
shared data cache running via another container on the local machine, but data accesses will still suffer costly crosscontainer boundary crossings.
Finally, Pyrosome also improves scalability. Containerbased services can be scaled by adding additional cores to a
container or by adding additional containers, each running
on its own core. Here, login() scales better when adding a
container per core, which is also common practice for most
microservices. Even so, the container-based service scales
less efficiently and flattens entirely after 12 hardware threads.
Pyrosome scales nearly linearly to 16 hardware threads (2
hardware threads for each of the 8 physical cores).

Throughput and Scalability

First, we compare the throughput and scalability of a small
service deployed on Pyrosome to one running as a conventional, containerized microservice to show the benefits of its
reduced communication and isolation costs.
In this experiment we use 4 physical nodes. Each node runs
Ubuntu 20.04 with Linux 5.4 kernel. We deploy a container
orchestration platform using Kubernetes for microservice
creation. One node runs the Kubernetes co/troller and another node is used as the server node either running Pyrosome
or, for the baseline, the container cluster. Another node hosts
the external (MongoDB) database that the microservices access. The last node runs a wrk client which generates load in
a closed-loop (for 10 seconds per run with results averaged
over 10 runs for each data point).
The user service has a login() function that validates the
password of a user login request. Clients send requests via
HTTP to call login(); the login() function then fetches
the user’s credentials before checking them against the function’s arguments. On Pyrosome, the login() function is
implemented in JavaScript; the container-based service is implemented in Go. By default in Pyrosome, after the HTTP request triggers login(), the request is handled entirely within
Pyrosome. The user’s credentials are cached in Pyrosome’s
local KVStore cache. When login() is deployed as a conventional microservice, the user’s credentials must be accessed
from the external MongoDB node. This simple function is
fairly representative of many of functions in microservices,

7

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Figure 8: Decomposing a Service into Finer Services

5.2.2

Service Decomposition Costs

Figure 9: Efficiency of Decomposition

Here we microbenchmark performance as we progressively
decompose a service function into finer and finer-grained
services both with Pyrosome and using containers. The experiment runs on two physical nodes; one to run the service
within Pyrosome or within Docker containers. We compare
Pyrosome with two different implementations of the container
version. One uses the conventional HTTP protocol for communications between containers, the other uses the Apache
Thrift protocol [19] which is faster than HTTP. In both container implementations the service function is implemented
in JavaScript running on Node.js. The other node is used as
the client, and it runs wrk2 in an open loop at a low request
rate to measure the latency. Each run averages many samples,
and each data point is the average over 10 runs.
In this experiment we emulate the decomposition of a
service and measure the costs. Figure 8 shows an example of decomposition. First, we can split a 8 ms service that
implements 8ms of computation into two services, each of
which runs for 4 ms and chained together to complete the
functionalitytotal 8ms computation. Then we can split it further into 4 services each running for 2 ms. In all these cases,
the total computation time is the same (8ms), but as the computation is decomposed into more services, more context
switch and communication costs are added in between the
services. We measure the total time to complete the service
chain, and then calculate the efficiency as:

when short running services are decomposed into even smaller
services, demonstrating that the low decomposition cost on
Pyrosome allows much finer grain microservices. From the
measured numbers we can calculate the cost of a round-trip
call between two services, which is about 44 μs on Pyrosome.
So if we decompose a 4ms computation into 80 services
on Pyrosome, which means each service runs for 50 μs, the
efficiency will drop below 50%. This is an estimation of the
limit of decomposition on Pyrosome, which is more than an
order of magnitude finer granularity compared to what can be
achieved using containers.
5.2.3

Social Network Application

To evaluate how reduced decomposition costs can improve the
performance of real world applications, we implemented the
social network application from the DeathStarBench [22]
on Pyrosome, and then we compare the latency of the
compose-post request.
We use 2 physical nodes. One is used as the server to run
Pyrosome or the DeathStarBench. Another node is used as
the client, and it runs wrk2 to average latency across many
requests under a low request rate using an open loop; each
data point is the average value of 10 runs.
compose-post is one of the client-facing APIs provided
by the social network application. Its function is to upload
a new post from a user. Similar to Twitter posts, a post can
include text, media, user mentions and URLs. Figure 10a
shows the graph of services invoked by a compose-post request. A compose-post HTTP request from a client first
arrives at the Nginx server, which acts as the front-end of the
application. The Nginx server then parses the HTTP request
and invokes other services. In the case of compose-post
request, the Nginx invokes 4 backend services to process the
request. The text service is invoked to process and upload
the text of the post, it then invokes the user_mention service
to process user mentions and the url_shorten service to

Service Computation Time
Efficiency = ServiceTotal
Chain End-to-End Completion Time

Figure 9 shows the results. We vary the time length to
emulate the decomposition of short and long running services.
The upper left is the decomposition of a 4 ms service, the
upper right is a 8 ms service, the lower left is a 16 ms service,
and the lower right is a 32 ms service. From the results,
we can see that with containers decomposition lowers the
efficiency significantly. For Pyrosome, decomposition cost
is low, and the efficiency almost remains the same when a
service is decomposed into a chain of smaller services. Also,
the gap between containers and Pyrosome is much bigger

8

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

(a) compose-post request in DeathStarBench.
(b) compose-post request onin Pyrosome.

(c) Latency of compose-post request.

Figure 10: Compare compose-post request in DeathStarBench and Pyrosome
shorten URLs in the post. The user service processes the
username and id of the author of the post. The unique-id service creates a unique post id for the post. The media service
processes the media references of the post. The outputs of all
the services mentioned above are sent to the compose_post
service to be assembled into the final version of the post.
compose_post then invokes the post_storage service to
store the post into MongoDB. A memcached server is also
used by the post_storage service to cache posts for faster
access. compose_post also invokes the user_timeline service and write_home_timeline service to update timelines.
write_home_timeline invokes the social_graph service
to get followers of the user and update their timelines. Users’
timelines are stored in MongoDB with Redis as cache. In
DeathStarBench all these services are implemented in C++
and isolated in containers with the Apache Thrift communication protocol.
Figure 10b shows the structure of the social network application ported to Pyrosome, which is very similar to the
DeathStarBench version, except that these services are implemented as JS functions in V8 sandboxes, and user posts and
timelines are stored in the underlying datastore on Pyrosome.
Figure 10c shows the median and 99 percentile latencies
of the compose-post request on Pyrosome and DeathStarBench measured under low request rate. The median latency
is 2.17 ms for Pyrosome versus 8.51 ms for DeathStarBench.
The 99 percentile latency is 3.53 ms for Pyrosome versus
10.00 ms for DeathStarBench. The results show that with
low decomposition costs, Pyrosome can reduce the median
latency of a complicated microservices application by 3/4 and
the 99 percentile latency by 2/3 compared to the containerized
version of the application.
5.2.4

Figure 11: Kubernetes and Pyrosome react to sudden load
increase.

the Kubernetes cluster to host microservice containers, the
remaining one is used to run the wrk2 clients. wrk2 can generate open loop load with specified request rate, we use it to
control the offered load. For Pyrosome we use two physical
nodes, one for Pyrosome server and the other for wrk2 clients.
We use the default settings for the Kubernetes autoscaler and
set 90% CPU utilization as the trigger metric for scaling.
We use the same workload as in §5.2.1 that uses the login
function in the User service, and we run the User service
without an external database accesses to eliminate the its
impact. We run two scripts on the client node at the same
time, one runs wrk2 to generate workload, the other runs
wrk2 under low load to measure latency. The workload generation script starts with very low load at 100 reqs/s, then
later increases offered load to a much higher request rate.
For Kubernetes the request rate increases to 16k reqs/s and
for Pyrosome it increases to 150k reqs/s. From the throughput experiment of §5.2.1, that represents about 20% of the
maximum throughput of Kubernetes and about 65% of the
maximum throughput of Pyrosome.
Figure 11 shows the measured median latencies of
Kubernetes and Pyrosome during the workload. It shows
that the median latency is greatly increased during the scale

Resource Elasticity

In this experiment we compare the scaling capabilities of
Kubernetes [6] and Pyrosome in reaction to changing
workloads. For Kubernetes, we use a cluster of 3 physical nodes, one runs the Kubernetes controller, another runs

9

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Figure 12: Fanout application.

up period of Kubernetes. For Pyrosome is not impacted
after the sudden large load increase. We observe that the
Kubernetes autoscaler struggles to meet this load; after the
load increase, the autoscaler is triggered 3 times, and each
time it starts 3 or 4 more containers. This shows two problems
with scaling via Kubernetes. First, the cost of starting new
containers is high. Second, it doesn’tdoes not know how many
new containers need to be provisioned to meet the increased
load. The autoscaler makes the speculation that starting 3 or
4 containers may be able to handle the load increase. However, when the load increase is too high, the autoscaler will be
triggered multiple times to allocate enough resource, which
slows the scaling up process further. From Figure 11, we can
see that the scaling up phase of Kubernetes is more than 2
minutes, and during that time the User service is effectively
unavailable because the service is saturated and all requests
experience very high latency. On the contrary, Pyrosome is
able to immediate pivot resources to whichever service within
its runtime needs them, even at fine-grained timescales. As
a result, it handles bigger load increases with no impact on
client-perceived latency.

5.3

Figure 13: Latency of fanout application.

Figure
14:
Mixed
shardingpartitioning.

with/without

edge of function execution times; instead, it simply tries to
distribute work randomly to under-loaded cores when the core
that receives a request is under high load.
We vary the load to test the schedulers’ ability to optimize
parallelizable functions under different CPU loads. From
Figure 13 we can see that under low load, both schedulers can
use available CPU resources to run parallelizable functions in
parallel so that to reduce latency. When CPU load increases
it becomes harder to find available CPU resources to run the
functions in parallel, as a result more of the functions are run
sequentially thus latencies increase. Under higher CPU load,
our execution-time-aware scheduler is better than the simple
scheduler at finding CPU resources to parallelize execution.
The execution-time-aware scheduler efficiently parallelizes
execution even under more than 70% CPU utilization while
response times under simple scheduler spike.

Scheduler Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the design of Pyrosome scheduler.
In all of the experiments in this section we run Pyrosome on
16 cores, 8 of which are dispatcher cores. Each dispatcher
core is allocated a hardware NIC queue and runs its own user
level network stack and DPDK driver. In these experiments,
Pyrosome’s user-level networking stack adds increased pressure on scheduling; since the reduced overheads and response
times mean scheduling and inter-service interference at the
primary factors that determine client-observed response times,
especially for short-running functions.
5.3.1

workload

Execution-Time-Aware Scheduling

In this microbenchmark we demonstrate that Pyrosome’s
execution-time-aware scheduling allows better use of CPU
resources than baseline approaches that have no visibility
into service invocation runtimes. To show this, we construct
a “fanout” application (Figure 12) that invokes 10 functions
each runs for 10 ms in parallel. As a baseline, we implement
a “simple scheduler” that doesn’tdoes not leverage the knowl-

5.3.2

Execution-Time-Aware ShardingPartitioning

In this microbenchmark, we evaluate Pyrosome’s ability to
handle a mixture of long-running and short-running functions
with its execution-time-aware shardingpartitioning. A shortrunning function runs for 10 ms and a long running function

10

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Figure 16: Different application structures.

Figure 15:
Soft shardingpartitioning
shardingpartitioning.

versus

hard

runs for 100 ms. The workload is held constant to use 70%
of all CPU resources and the ratio of short-running functions
and long-running functions is varied. The ratio is calculated
by total CPU time occupied by short-running functions versus
CPU time occupied by long-running functions. The upper
graph of Figure 14 shows the latencies of short-running functions with and without shardingpartitioning (the green line
and the red line respectively), and the lower graph shows the
latencies of long-running functions.
In this microbenchmark the scheduler uses execution-timeaware shardingpartitioning to limit long-running functions on
work cores while short-running functions can be scheduled on
both the dispatcher cores and worker cores. This is called soft
shardingpartitioning and it is the default shardingpartitioning
policy of execution-time-aware shardingpartitioning. From
the graph we can see that with shardingpartitioning, latencies of both the short-running functions and the long-running
functions are much lower, especially for the short-running
functions. When the ratio is 1:6 the latencies of long-running
functions increase greatly, this is because long-running functions are limited to the 8 worker cores and the load of longrunning functions at this ratio has exceeded the CPU capacity
of the 8 worker cores.
We also compared soft shardingpartitioning with hard
shardingpartitioning where the scheduler only schedules
short running functions on dispatcher cores. Figure 15 shows
that with hard shardingpartitioning when the ratio of shortrunning functions is high the dispatcher cores will be overloaded. Overloading dispatcher cores not only results in much
higher latencies for short-running functions, but also worsens the latencies of long-running functions as the dispatching
of long-running functions is also impacted. In the middle,
when the load is about evenly split between short-running and
long-running functions and none of the cores is overloaded,
the performance of soft sharding is similar to that of hard
shardingpartitioning. Overall, soft shardingpartitioning is a

Figure 17: Latencies of applications with different structures.
better shardingpartitioning policy that achieves similar performance at avoiding head-of-line blocking of long-running
functions as hard shardingpartitioning, while allowing more
flexibility for scheduling short-running functions.
5.3.3

Scheduling Complex Applications

Microservices and serverless applications are naturally comprised of workflows of inter-dependent functions. User perceived end-to-end latency for these applications depends on
the completion of the execution of the whole workflow. The
structure of a workflow dictates how its execution can be optimized by the scheduler. Fanouts of functions in a workflow
provide opportunities for parallel execution to optimize endto-end latency of the workflow. Previous microbenchmarks
showed that Pyrosome’s execution-time-aware scheduler can
leverage the parallelism within a workflow to optimize the
latency. However, this leads to a challenge: it is also possible for concurrent workflows to block each other’s execution
resulting in worse latencies.
To evaluate the scheduler’s performance with different application structures, in this microbenchmark we construct
three example applications as shown in Figure 16. The left
side shows an application of a sequential chain of functions,
the right side shows an application of fanout of functions,
and the middle shows an application of mixed sequential and
fanout stages. The three applications have the same total
serialized execution time (100 ms).
Figure 17 shows the latencies of running the three applications on Pyrosome. From the result we can see that for
high-fanout applications the scheduler can optimize latency
even under relatively high CPU load. For complete sequential

11

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

tion is high. The bottom-left graph turns on fused-execution
mode for the social network application; this improves latency, but it still experiences some head-of-line blocking from
the fanout application. In the bottom-right graph we set the
threshold for shardingpartitioning to 5 ms, which forces the
fanout application to be scheduled on the worker cores with
the long-running functions. This greatly reduces the latency
for social network application because head-of-line blocking is avoided, but at the cost of increased latency for the
fanout application because it is limited on worker cores with
fewer CPU resources for parallel optimization. These parameters can be mechanisms for higher-level policies for mixed
workloads.

Figure 18: Latencies of mixed applications

chain application the scheduler cannot optimize latency at
all, and its latency worsens with increased CPU load because
of more interferences between concurrent workflows under
higher CPU load. For complex applications with both fanout
and sequential stages, the scheduler can optimize its latency
under low CPU load, but with increased CPU load its latency
becomes worse than sequential execution due to interference.
This benchmark shows that application-level information,
such as the structure of the application workflow, can be leveraged to optimize the end-to-end latency of complex microservices and serverless applications. Extracting this information
automatically to optimize application execution is an interesting future direction; for now, we implement a fused-execution
mode for applications. Requests from applications marked
as fused are run using run-to-completion model with the entire workflow executed on a single core (as if it is a single
function). One heuristic that may make sense for triggering fused-execution is to use a similar execution-time aware
approach where if the latency of a workflow is greater its
serialized execution time it is fused. With such a heuristic,
the scheduler could leverage applications’ internal parallelism
to optimize latency under low CPU load, and when load increases, interference from concurrent workflows could be
mitigated.
5.3.4

6

Related Work

Lighter-weight Sandboxes. There are many efforts trying to address the performance and scaling challenges
of serverless by reducing the overhead of containers or adopting lightweight sandboxes. SAND [3] addresses the issues
by running functions of the same application as processes
in the same container to reduce isolation costs, and providing fast local messaging bus for functions on the same host.
Firecracker [2] is a new Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM)
built by Amazon that runs serverless functions in lightweight
MicroVMs with a minimized Linux kernel. Nightcore [27]
is a serverless function runtime for latency-sensitive interactive microservices that implements fast internal function
calls and other optimizations to achieve high performance
with container-based isolation. All these solutions still rely
on heavy weight sandboxes such as processes, containers
and VMs, so their overheads and cold start latencies are still
high compared to Pyrosome. They also rely on OS-level
scheduling which is costly and lacks request-level visibility.
There are also solutions from the academia and the industry [21,26,29,53,58,60,62] that leverage lightweight language
level isolation such as the V8 JavaScript or WebAssembly
runtime to build fast serverless frameworks. But these frameworks don’tdo not consider the microservices scenario of
complicated interconnections and communications between a
large number of services.

Mixed Workloads

In this experiment we evaluate the scheduler’s performance
with a mixture of heterogeneous applications. The mixture
consists of the social network application, the fanout application and the long-running 100 ms function from previous
experiments. We keep Pyrosome at about 60% CPU utilization with each application contributing to about 1/3 of the load.
The results (Figure 18) not only shows that Pyrosome’s scheduler can accommodate a mixture of very different applications,
but also it shows that different scheduler parameters can prioritize different applications. The upper-left graph shows the
latencies with 50 ms as the scheduler’s shardingpartitioning
threshold. The scheduler is able to optimize the latency of the
fanout application, but the latency of social network applica-

Actor systems. Pyrosome’s approach to containing several
logical services within a single process runtime bears similarity to actors systems. Actors are small logical agents that
communicate and trigger computation and concurrency via
messages. Frequently many actors are multiplexed on a single
machine or within a single runtime allowing similar optimizations to Pyrosome. For example, Scala’s original actor system
implements some inter-actor messaging as direct procedure
call [25]. There are some popular actor systems used in production [9, 35, 55], and some recent efforts seek to improve
inter-host messaging efficiency in actor systems [37]. Ray is

12

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

a recent actor-based approach for executing distributed analytics tasks [40]. Pyrosome differs from these systems since it is
focused on microservice-oriented architectures. Instances of
the same service of a microservices application often need to
share the same underlying database, whereas actors don’tdo
not share state.

7
7.1

design of cloud services runtime targeted toward microservice- and serverless-era applications can greatly improve performance, enable more granular decomposition of services,
and scale up/down better than today’s container-based platforms. Additionally, Pyrosome shows that we can implement
smart scheduling optimization that leverages information collected at runtime to utilize cores efficiently and minimize
application tail latency.

Discussion
Contributions

References

The main contribution of this paper is to evaluate how much
benefit microservices can get from a clean-slate redesign of
the cloud stack with light-weight language-based isolation.
As currently microservices applications are still mostly deployed in containers, so we choose container and kubernetes
as the baseline to compare with. Although there are various works from the academia and industry that leverages
language-based isolation to built cloud systems, but these
works mainly focuses on serverless applications implemented
in one or few functions, and do not consider aspects that are
specific to microservices such as the large numbers of services
and the complex inter-services structure and communications.
In this work we implemented a fairly complex application
from the DeathStarBench for evaluation, and the design of
our scheduler takes into consideration of the scheduling of
such complex microservices applications.

7.2

[1] Azure functions. https://azure.microsoft.com/
en-us/services/functions/, 2022.
[2] Alexandru Agache, Marc Brooker, Alexandra Iordache,
Anthony Liguori, Rolf Neugebauer, Phil Piwonka, and
Diana-Maria Popa. Firecracker: Lightweight virtualization for serverless applications. In 17th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 20), pages 419–434, 2020.
[3] Istemi Ekin Akkus, Ruichuan Chen, Ivica Rimac,
Manuel Stein, Klaus Satzke, Andre Beck, Paarijaat
Aditya, and Volker Hilt.
Sand: Towards highperformance serverless computing. In 2018 Usenix
Annual Technical Conference (USENIXATC 18), pages
923–935, 2018.
[4] Inc. or its affiliates. Amazon Web Services. Aws
lambda. https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/, 2022.

Limitations

One limitation of this work is that it is done on a single
node. We focuses on a single node because the performance
differences between heavy-weight container-based isolation
and light-weight language-based isolation exist on a single
node. We can use straight forward scale up techniques such as
cluster-wide scheduler to scale up Pyrosome to multi-nodes,
but that is not the focus of this work.
Another limitation is that as Pyrosome’s security isolation
is weaker, it cannot be used to run untrusted code and services
run in the same Pyrosome instance must be mutually trusted.
So Pyrosome is better fit for trusted internal infrastucture
and private cloud platform. But as many large microservices
applications like Netflix are deployed in such trusted evironment, we think the Pyrome will be of great value for such
applications.

8

[5] Lixiang Ao, Liz Izhikevich, Geoffrey M Voelker, and
George Porter. Sprocket: A serverless video processing
framework. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
Cloud Computing, pages 263–274, 2018.
[6] The Kubernetes Authors. Production-grade container
orchestration, 2022. URL: https://kubernetes.io.
[7] Paul Barham, Boris Dragovic, Keir Fraser, Steven Hand,
Tim Harris, Alex Ho, Rolf Neugebauer, Ian Pratt, and
Andrew Warfield. Xen and the art of virtualization.
ACM SIGOPS operating systems review, 37(5):164–177,
2003.
[8] Adam Belay, George Prekas, Ana Klimovic, Samuel
Grossman, Christos Kozyrakis, and Edouard Bugnion.
Ix: A protected dataplane operating system for high
throughput and low latency. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 14), pages 49–65, 2014.

Conclusion

Today’s cloud-native applications are naturally structured in
a higher-level and more decomposed way than classic monolithic applications run on the abstraction of a full machine.
However, today’s inefficient legacy cloud software infrastructure and abstractions hinder the performance and scalability
of these applications. Pyrosome shows that a clean-slate

[9] Phil Bernstein, Sergey Bykov, Alan Geller, Gabriel
Kliot, and Jorgen Thelin. Orleans: Distributed virtual
actors for programmability and scalability. MSR-TR2014–41, 2014.

13

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

[10] Ankit Bhardwaj, Chinmay Kulkarni, and Ryan Stutsman.
Adaptive placement for in-memory storage functions. In
2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 20), pages 127–141, 2020.

serverless-first, light-weight wasm runtime for the edge.
In Proceedings of the 21st International Middleware
Conference, pages 265–279, 2020.
[22] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Dailun Cheng, Ankitha Shetty,
Priyal Rathi, Nayan Katarki, Ariana Bruno, Justin Hu,
Brian Ritchken, Brendon Jackson, et al. An open-source
benchmark suite for microservices and their hardwaresoftware implications for cloud & edge systems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, pages 3–18, 2019.

[11] Zack Bloom.
Cloud computing without containers.
https://blog.cloudflare.com/cloudcomputing-without-containers/, 2018.
[12] Joao Carreira, Pedro Fonseca, Alexey Tumanov, Andrew
Zhang, and Randy Katz. Cirrus: A serverless framework
for end-to-end ml workflows. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, pages 13–24,
2019.

[23] WebAssembly Community Group.
https://webassembly.org, 2024.

[13] Ryan Chard, Tyler J Skluzacek, Zhuozhao Li, Yadu
Babuji, Anna Woodard, Ben Blaiszik, Steven Tuecke,
Ian Foster, and Kyle Chard. Serverless supercomputing: High performance function as a service for science.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04907, 2019.

[24] Andreas Haas, Andreas Rossberg, Derek L Schuff,
Ben L Titzer, Michael Holman, Dan Gohman, Luke
Wagner, Alon Zakai, and JF Bastien. Bringing the
web up to speed with webassembly. In Proceedings of
the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation, pages 185–200,
2017.

[14] Matthew Clark.
Powering bbc online with
nanoservices.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/
internet/entries/5bdabd53-090e-4611-a5d54faea05aeb35, 2018.

[25] Philipp Haller and Martin Odersky. Scala Actors: Unifying thread-based and event-based programming. Theoretical Computer Science, 410(2):202 – 220, 2009. Distributed Computing Techniques.

[15] Melvin E Conway. How do committees invent. Datamation, 14(4):28–31, 1968.

[26] Pat Hickey. Lucet takes webassembly beyond the
browser | fastly. https://www.fastly.com/blog/
announcing-lucet-fastly-native-webassemblycompiler-runtime, 2024.

[16] Diego Didona and Willy Zwaenepoel. Size-aware sharding for improving tail latencies in in-memory key-value
stores. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19), pages
79–94, 2019.
[17] Inc. Fermyon Technologies.
//www.fermyon.com/, 2024.

Fermyon.

WebAssembly.

[27] Zhipeng Jia and Emmett Witchel. Nightcore: efficient
and scalable serverless computing for latency-sensitive,
interactive microservices. In Proceedings of the 26th
ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
pages 152–166, 2021.

http:

[18] Sadjad Fouladi, Riad S Wahby, Brennan Shacklett,
Karthikeyan Vasuki Balasubramaniam, William Zeng,
Rahul Bhalerao, Anirudh Sivaraman, George Porter, and
Keith Winstein. Encoding, fast and slow: Low-latency
video processing using thousands of tiny threads. In
14th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI 17), pages 363–376, 2017.

[28] Eric Jonas, Johann Schleier-Smith, Vikram Sreekanti,
Chia-Che Tsai, Anurag Khandelwal, Qifan Pu, Vaishaal
Shankar, Joao Carreira, Karl Krauth, Neeraja Yadwadkar, et al. Cloud programming simplified: A berkeley view on serverless computing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.03383, 2019.

[19] Apache Software Foundation. Apache thrift. https:
//thrift.apache.org, 2022.

[29] MJ Jones.
How compute@edge is tackling the most frustrating aspects of serverless.
https://www.fastly.com/blog/how-computeedge-is-tackling-the-most-frustratingaspects-of-serverless, 2020.

[20] Armando Fox, Rean Griffith, Anthony Joseph, Randy
Katz, Andrew Konwinski, Gunho Lee, David Patterson,
Ariel Rabkin, Ion Stoica, et al. Above the clouds: A
berkeley view of cloud computing. Dept. Electrical
Eng. and Comput. Sciences, University of California,
Berkeley, Rep. UCB/EECS, 28(13):2009, 2009.

[30] Kostis Kaffes, Timothy Chong, Jack Tigar Humphries,
Adam Belay, David Mazières, and Christos Kozyrakis.
Shinjuku: Preemptive Scheduling for Microsecondscale Tail Latency. In 16th USENIX Symposium on

[21] Phani Kishore Gadepalli, Sean McBride, Gregor Peach,
Ludmila Cherkasova, and Gabriel Parmer. Sledge: a

14

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI
2019, Boston, MA, February 26-28, 2019., pages 345–
360, 2019.

Carlsbad, CA, October 2018. USENIX Association. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/
osdi18/presentation/moritz.

[31] Ram Srivatsa Kannan, Lavanya Subramanian, Ashwin
Raju, Jeongseob Ahn, Jason Mars, and Lingjia Tang.
Grandslam: Guaranteeing slas for jobs in microservices
execution frameworks. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
EuroSys Conference 2019, pages 1–16, 2019.

[41] Mayukh Nair.
How netflix works:
the
(hugely simplified) complex stuff that happens every time you hit play, 2017.
URL:
https://medium.com/refraction-techeverything/how-netflix-works-the-hugelysimplified-complex-stuff-that-happensevery-time-you-hit-play-3a40c9be254b.

[32] Avi Kivity, Yaniv Kamay, Dor Laor, Uri Lublin, and
Anthony Liguori. kvm: the linux virtual machine monitor. In Proceedings of the Linux symposium, volume 1,
pages 225–230. Dttawa, Dntorio, Canada, 2007.

[42] Amy Ousterhout, Joshua Fried, Jonathan Behrens,
Adam Belay, and Hari Balakrishnan. Shenango: Achieving High CPU Efficiency for Latency-sensitive Datacenter Workloads. In 16th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI
2019, Boston, MA, February 26-28, 2019., pages 361–
378, 2019.

[33] Paul Kocher, Jann Horn, Anders Fogh, Daniel Genkin,
Daniel Gruss, Werner Haas, Mike Hamburg, Moritz
Lipp, Stefan Mangard, Thomas Prescher, et al. Spectre
attacks: Exploiting speculative execution. Communications of the ACM, 63(7):93–101, 2020.

[43] Matthew Perron, Raul Castro Fernandez, David DeWitt, and Samuel Madden. Starling: A scalable query
engine on cloud function services. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.11727, 2019.

[34] Chinmay Kulkarni, Sara Moore, Mazhar Naqvi,
Tian Zhang, Robert Ricci, and Ryan Stutsman.
Splinter:{bare-metal}
extensions
for {multitenant}{low-latency} storage.
In 13th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 18), pages 627–643, 2018.

[44] Danilo Poccia.
New – provisioned concurrency
for lambda functions, 2019.
URL: https://
aws.amazon.com/cn/blogs/aws/new-provisionedconcurrency-for-lambda-functions/.

[35] Inc. Lightbend. Akka. http://akka.io/, 2024.
[36] Ross Mcilroy, Jaroslav Sevcik, Tobias Tebbi, Ben L
Titzer, and Toon Verwaest. Spectre is here to stay:
An analysis of side-channels and speculative execution.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05178, 2019.

[45] George Prekas, Marios Kogias, and Edouard Bugnion.
ZygOS: Achieving Low Tail Latency for Microsecondscale Networked Tasks.
In Proceedings of
the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP ’17, pages 325–341, New York,
NY, USA, 2017.
ACM.
URL: http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/3132747.3132780, https://
doi.org/10.1145/3132747.3132780.

[37] Christopher S. Meiklejohn, Heather Miller, and
Peter Alvaro.
PARTISAN: Scaling the Distributed Actor Runtime.
In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 19), pages
63–76, Renton, WA, July 2019. USENIX Association. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc19/presentation/meiklejohn.

[46] Qifan Pu, Shivaram Venkataraman, and Ion Stoica.
Shuffling, fast and slow: Scalable analytics on serverless infrastructure. In 16th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
19), pages 193–206, 2019.

[38] Dirk Merkel. Docker: lightweight linux containers for
consistent development and deployment. Linux journal,
2014(239):2, 2014.
[39] Microsoft.
Cloud functions.
cloud.google.com/functions, 2022.

[47] Robert Ricci, Eric Eide, and the CloudLab Team. Introducing CloudLab: Scientific infrastructure for advancing cloud architectures and applications. ; login:,
39(6):36–38, 2014.

https://

[40] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang,
Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih
Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I.
Jordan, and Ion Stoica.
Ray: A Distributed
Framework for Emerging AI Applications.
In
13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18), pages 561–577,

[48] Francisco Romero, Qian Li, Neeraja J Yadwadkar, and
Christos Kozyrakis. Infaas: A model-less inference
serving system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13348, 2019.
[49] Stephen Röttger and Artur Janc.
A spectre proof-of-concept for a spectre-proof web.
https://security.googleblog.com/2021/03/a-

15

Submitted to the Journal of Systems Research (JSys)

2024

spectre-proof-of-concept-for-spectre.html,
2021.
[50] Inc. Scylla DB. Seastar. http://www.seastar-project.org,
2019.
[51] Mohammad Shahrad, Rodrigo Fonseca, Íñigo Goiri,
Gohar Chaudhry, Paul Batum, Jason Cooke, Eduardo
Laureano, Colby Tresness, Mark Russinovich, and Ricardo Bianchini. Serverless in the wild: Characterizing
and optimizing the serverless workload at a large cloud
provider. In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 20), pages 205–218, 2020.
[52] Vaishaal Shankar, Karl Krauth, Qifan Pu, Eric Jonas,
Shivaram Venkataraman, Ion Stoica, Benjamin Recht,
and Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. Numpywren: Serverless
linear algebra. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09679, 2018.
[53] Simon Shillaker and Peter Pietzuch.
Faasm:
Lightweight isolation for efficient stateful serverless
computing. In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 20), pages 419–433, 2020.
[54] Stephen Soltesz, Herbert Pötzl, Marc E Fiuczynski,
Andy Bavier, and Larry Peterson. Container-based
operating system virtualization: a scalable, highperformance alternative to hypervisors. In Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys european conference
on computer systems 2007, pages 275–287, 2007.
[55] The Erlang Team. Erlang programming language.
https://www.erlang.org/, 2024.
[56] The Rust Team. Rust. https://www.rust-lang.org,
2024.
[57] The V8 Team. V8 javascript engine. https://v8.dev,
2024.
[58] Kenton Varda.
Introducing cloudflare workers: Run javascript service workers at the edge.
https://blog.cloudflare.com/introducingcloudflare-workers/, 2017.
[59] wasmCloud LLC. Wasm-native orchestration. http:
//wasmcloud.com/, 2024.
[60] Inc. Wasmer. Wasmer. https://wasmer.io, 2024.
[61] Jie You, Jingfeng Wu, Xin Jin, and Mosharaf Chowdhury. Ship compute or ship data? why not both? In 18th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 21), pages 633–651, 2021.
[62] Tian Zhang, Dong Xie, Feifei Li, and Ryan Stutsman.
Narrowing the gap between serverless and its state with
storage functions. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, pages 1–12, 2019.

16

